---
layout: post
title: "Lean, Batch Sizes and the impact on Skills"
description: ""
category: 
tags: []
---
I run a services team, we essentially build up technology and domain skills that we believe are valuable, and on sell them. I am fairly new to this particular business, from a traditionally delivery background of running an internal IT department (the other side of the supply chain as it were). Traditionally this particular business focussed on deep specialization in areas like SAP, SAS, tibco, etc... Particular technology stacks where the depth of skills was called for by the market, but also particular delivery models were in place which leant itself to waterfall type delivery models which are characterized by large batch sizes.

I have been grappling with my current strategy to ensure that I can deliver more and new value, not only to our existing customer base, but also into different market segments and micro verticals. The call from the market seems to be leaning towards more versatility of skills as apposed to simply narrow and deep, which is intuitively correct from my perspective, because that is how I staffed my teams previously. So I have been trying to understand the root cause as it is germain to my positioning and strategy.

There is a technology element to it. We are finally getting to that promised land in IT where we can effectively combine a wide range of technologies effectively and deliver business value quite quickly. This is largely enabled by open source and collaborative development. I can quickly wip up a solution based on linux, rails, postgres, hadoop, casandra and S3/Akka/Storm and have a complete solution that looks good, scales, etc... And with advancements in operational maturity (DevOps, Chef, Puppet, etc..) I have deliver it reliably, incrementally and rapidly. And for those you have COTS applications, largely these have become a combination of open source themselves, with a certain amount of domain functionality already in place which is where the value lies. These will always exist, and should, however the absolute range of technologies has increased immensely, but in a seemingly mature and sustainable way. One only has to look at the Thoughtworks quarterly technology report.

The conclusion I have come to is that range of technologies is only a part it, and probably a smaller part. There has always been a wide range of technical solutions to any problem, what has changed is the way in which we deliver. Driven by valid business drivers, Agile and Lean have emerged as the dominant approaches to delivery, and I for one totally subscribe to the Lean principles. One of the underlying principles is that of reducing batch sizes, get a product from start to finish, end to end as quickly as possible. Global efficiency is more important than local efficiency. This reduces waste and actually ends up delivering faster by combining a whole lot of local inefficiency into a global efficiency, where are large batch sizes (depending on your situation of course), tend to combine a whole lot of local efficiency into a global inefficiency. The purpose of the post if not to convince you of this of provide anymore background, the purpose of the post is to say that I think there is a correlation and causality between the skills profile being called for and this approach. As agile and lean is applied more and more, the skills profile of the team members has to change in the same way as the machines on the factory floor have to change. I believe the future software developer won't ever be an "Oracle Developer", or an SAP developer or any of those others. They are certainly going to be around for a while still, but I think their place is the market will reduce.
